---
layout: post
title: "Keep a backup!"
date: 2014-08-01
tags: Rants
categories: blog
---

Have you ever had that moment when you've completed a whole load of work
and then your computer crashes before saving things? Well, I had
something similar happen to me the other day - but worse. To be honest,
it was possibly my worst nightmare come true...

## The eerie question mark

On Tuesday this week, I ran my first WordPress workshop for General
Assembly in London. This was a new course that I'd developed recently
where I'd take students through the process of converting a static site
into a custom WordPress theme. I'd created a fake site to work with and
planned out a whole load of slides and materials for the group.

On Tuesday morning, I did one final rehearsal and made some last minute
tweaks to my slides before packing my laptop into my bag and heading
for the Tube.

When I arrived at GA, I got myself set up and opened my laptop to
connect up to the projector. 

Beachballin'. 

That all too familiar cursor just wouldn't stop spinning so I hit the
power button and forced a shut down.

When the machine booted up, I didn't see my familiar AtoZ CSS wallpaper
but a grey screen with a flashing question mark in the center of it. 

![Flashing question mark gif](/images/question-mark.gif)

I thought that was a bit weird so I turned it off and on again.

Same thing.

Restart.

Still nothing.

## Google to the rescue!

I borrowed a spare laptop and went in search of answers.

Google search: "Macbook pro startup flashing question mark". 
[Apple
Answer](http://support.apple.com/kb/TS1440?viewlocale=en_US&locale=en_US): "If you see a flashing question mark or a flashing globe
appear when you start your Mac, it usually means that your Mac can't
find the system software it needs to start up."

Crap.

As far as I could work out after tying various solutions, my computer
was completely knackered. 

I looked up to see 25 people in the room, awaiting the start of the
morning session.

More crap.

## Dropbox to the rescue!

Fortunately, I'd been smart enough to add all the sample code for the
two-day workshop to my Dropbox. I also had a backup copy of my slides
there too, in PDF format rather than Keynote, but beggars can't be
choosers.

I went to the Dropbox site on the borrowed laptop and attempted to log
in.

"Invalid Username or Password"

I tried a couple of other variations of passwords I might have used.

Nothing.

I then remembered that I'd recently gone on a massive security bender
and moved all of my "standard" passwords into
[LastPass](https://lastpass.com/). Last Pass is a password management
app that generates complex passwords and stores them in a database in
the cloud. This database can be unlocked with a master password.

However, in the heat of the moment, I completely forgot that I could
access my passwords online I thought I could only access them from the
app on my laptop. I went in search of another solution while my
heart-rate started to rise...

Would I have to send 25 people home with their money back???

## Email to the rescue!

Even more fortunately, I had emailed my teaching assistant [Andrea
Kennedy](https://twitter.com/butterloverz) a copy of the slides and
starter code so she could get up to speed with the material before the
class.

Within a matter of minutes, I was back up and running again having had
her send my material back to me.

## Sigh of relief

I was able to get my breath back and my heart rate down and after just
a few minutes delay, we kicked things off. Finally!

I had my laptop dropped off at a local repair shop and within a few
hours, my computer (which contains all my personal data, business
documents and client projects - my life) was returned to me in full
working order again. 

The issue was the failure of the SATA cable that connects up the hard
drive to the rest of the machine. Â£110 including VAT was all it took to
fix - I'd have paid double if that's what they'd invoiced me for!

The moral of this story is that things break and you never know when
it's going to happen. I've been a bit careless with keeping proper,
secure backups for too long but this has prompted me to become a bit
more diligent.
